Title: Lewis eyes dual-code World Cup history after league return
URL: https://www.bbc.com/sport/rugby-league/articles/ckg92zpyw2po


Dual-code international Ffion Lewis will play her first rugby league game for Wales in five years when they host Canada at The Gnoll on Sunday 19 July.
Former captain Lewis played in Wales' first international against England in June 2021 before swapping to union.
She was one of the first 12 players to earn professional union contracts with Wales in January 2022, but left the Welsh Rugby Union programme in 2025 after being informed her contract would not be renewed.
Lewis plays for London Broncos Women in the RFL Women's Championship, and won player of the match in their 58–10 win over Hull FC last month.
The 30-year-old says she's "really excited" to be back.
"Obviously it's been a few years but rugby league has always provided me an awesome opportunity to play and represent Wales," she said.
"I'm just really excited to get back out there.
"I signed for Broncos and played the last few weeks for them, having to re-learn the game because I've been in union full-time for a few years.
"But really looking forward to the weekend and towards the World Cup."
Wales launched the women's team in 2019 with the aim to reach the 2021 Women's Rugby League World Cup.
They will make their tournament debut in October after qualifying with wins over Ireland and the Netherlands in 2024.
Should Lewis be selected for the Rugby League World Cup squad, she will become the first Welsh woman to go to a World Cup in both codes.
"That would be class thing to say that I've been able to do," Lewis told BBC Sport Wales.
"Unfortunately I missed out on the [union] World Cup last year which was a big goal of mine coming back from injury, but that's elite sport and paths change.
"It was always my plan to try to make this World Cup regardless of what happened with union because I've always loved playing rugby league.
"The position I'm in now, it would be awesome but I haven't actually represented Wales since I did my ACL [in April 2023]."
Wales head coach Tom Brindle says the "door was always open" for a return.
"We started the journey and Ffion was part of the first training sessions we put together," he said.
"She's a competitor through and through and she's taken that and been successful in her career.
"We wished her well and was proud that she went on to be a full-time athlete because we never wanted to stop people's dreams
"She's gone away, played some rugby league this year, been competitive and that experience will obviously strengthen us."


'Enjoying rugby' again

In more recent years, Lewis' career was blighted by a serious knee injury and severe symptoms of endometriosis.
Back working as a teacher alongside her rugby league ambitions, Lewis says her "lows" have made her "appreciate the game in a different way."
"Being involved in elite programmes the majority of my twenties, my perspective has changed.
"I was very performance driven, but I've learned stepping back and enjoying the game is a big part of that.
"The highs and lows of my career have shaped my mindset, being injured, losing my full-time contract.
"All of those lows have made me appreciate the game in a different way and - back into league - I need to enjoy rugby again.
"Yes it's a different code, but re-learning it and being able to wear the jersey again is something I knew I'd lost before.
"I've been in this position before, I know how much I loved it and I'm just grateful that I've been able to have this opportunity again.
"I'm not done, I've still got some energy in the tank.
"Hopefully over the next few months I can show that and fingers crossed in the World Cup."
Sunday's opponents Canada competed at the 2017 and 2021 World Cups, but missed out on qualification to this year's tournament after a 48-0 defeat by Fiji.
Wales are currently ranked seventh in the world while Canada are 13th.


