Title: 'Opened new world' - Paralympian Breakwell on how fate launched career
URL: https://www.bbc.com/sport/tennis/articles/cz7502q2zz8o



Abbie Breakwell was a ball crew member darting around the tennis court at a tournament in Nottingham when a stranger from the stands gave her a life-changing idea.
It was simply to pick up the racquet herself and play.
Breakwell lives with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease - a muscle-wasting condition that means her legs have become weaker over time - as well as spinal syrinx, which is a ball of fluid on the spinal cord that she did not have diagnosed until she was 13.
It is why she was the only wheelchair user among the ball crew at the 2015 British Open Wheelchair Tennis Championships at the Nottingham Tennis Centre.
So things will have come full circle when the 23-year-old will, as one of Britain's top wheelchair tennis players, roll herself on to the grass court at the very same venue for an exhibition match this weekend.
"This place means so much to me," Breakwell told BBC East Midlands Today while sat outside centre court this week.
"It's where my career very first started. I was out there on one of the courts ball crewing and someone saw I had a disability and asked me if I'd like to have a go at wheelchair tennis."
It was a suggestion that, within a decade of taking up the sport, took her on to the famous clay courts of Roland Garros where she featured for ParalympicsGB at the Paris Games in 2024.
Earlier this season, the British number three from Long Eaton also hit a career-high ranking of 23 in the world.
And while the exhibition match that slots in alongside the finals at the Nottingham Open this weekend is not a competitive showdown, it will be a milestone moment at a venue she regards as her tennis home.
It is one of a number of matches taking place across the British grass-court season to mark 50 years of wheelchair tennis.
Breakwell says the match has given her a rare chance to reflect on all she has achieved in her young career as well as pause to appreciate how the sport has impacted her life.
"It opened the doors up to a whole new world," she said.
"It's a world of people who accept my disability, a world where I've made a lot of friends, a place where I found home with my disability and I realised it was OK to be different, it was OK to not be able to walk the same as everyone else and not to look the same as everybody else.
"The match is an incredible and huge moment because a lot of time as an athlete is spent looking forward to the next goal, the next thing I want to achieve, and sometimes we forget to look back."

Breakwell managed to train lightly while recovering and made her competitive return on clay courts in Brescia, Italy, in mid-May after 12 weeks out.
And while she proved to be an instant hit in her comeback tournament, finishing runner-up in the singles event and winning the doubles title with Switzerland's Angela Grosswiler, Breakwell says she is now "playing catch-up".
Victory in the Future Series event in Brescia was followed by a string of wins in the consolation draw at the higher ranked ITF 3 Series tournament in Padova.
Despite her lay-off and missed tournaments, the Long Eaton player is still ranked fourth in Britain a year on from making her Paralympic debut in Paris.
It was in the French capital that she teamed up with hugely experienced British number one Lucy Shuker - who has featured in the women's wheelchair draw at Wimbledon more than any player in the past decade.
Playing the Grand Slam event at SW19 remains Breakwell's "big dream", even if her health problems mean "it's unlikely to happen this year".
"Wimbledon has always been a goal for me - playing in front of a home crowd at a Grand Slam is everyone's dream as a player," she said.
"It is something that I'm still going to aim for, but it hurts that it is going to be delayed. But I will get there.
"It means I need to make sure that I remain focused on making sure I'm back at full strength, healthy and getting back into the competitions and rhythm of everything."
Breakwell described the challenges she faced at the start of 2025 as "extra hurdles" to be dealt with, and insists she will not let it undo the years of work it has taken to establish herself as one of the sport's brightest emerging talents.
"When you are ill like that and not able to physically train, you can still do the mental training and work on the psychological side. And I did do that a lot," she said.
"It was very difficult because you are staying away from the thing that you love the most and the thing that makes you feel you. And also, it's the thing that gives you a connection to the world and the people who understand you.
"It's been difficult at times, especially on days when you are feeling tired, but you just know you have to keep pushing through.
"Having this time off has really helped me. It has made me realise and given me that confidence to say 'I've been ill, but I can still come back'.
"I did come back strong and now it's about continuing with that."

Breakwell eyes Wimbledon grass next

Breakwell, who also views the match as an "amazing" chance to showcase disability sport during one of major events leading up to Wimbledon, will also be using it to get acquainted with the feel of the grass court after illness - which affected her eyesight - sidelined her last summer.
While it ruined her hopes of trying to play at her home Grand Slam last season, it has not dented her dream of one day getting to compete at SW19.
"I've love to be at Wimbledon," Breakwell said.
"That is the next step now - I've done the Paralympics and Grand Slams are the next ones to tick off."


