Title: Haaland & Heggem inspiring Baggies' striker Heggebo
URL: https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/articles/c1eyx73842do


West Bromwich Albion's Norway striker Aune Heggebo says it is "inspirational" to see Erling Haaland and his former Baggies team-mate Torbjorn Heggem creating history for their country at the World Cup.
Manchester City striker Haaland's seven goals and Bologna defender Heggem's solidity have helped take Norway to the quarter-finals for the first time - and a showdown with England in Miami on Saturday.
Heggebo, who has won two international caps, said watching his country's exploits has been incredible.
"I get a bit of FOMO [fear of missing out] from the people living in Norway because it's complete madness going on in the streets," he told BBC Radio WM.
After Haaland scored both goals in Norway's 2-1 win over five-time winners Brazil in the last 16, Heggebo said he "couldn't sleep" after watching it.
"It was a piece of Norwegian history that - Norway beating Brazil there. It's inspirational and so unreal to watch the Norwegian team perform.
"You've got the whole of the Norwegian population following the national team now. It's like even people that don't follow football have started to fall in love with it.
"It's definitely bringing the whole nation together, and I don't think people saw it coming.
"To follow as a fan it's so fun; it's putting Norway on the map and is so great for the country's spirit."


'It would be a dream to play in that team'

Heggebo made his international debut in a World Cup qualifier against Moldova in September last year and replaced Haaland, who scored five in Norway's 11-1 win, as a late substitute.
He said coming on for Haaland was a special moment.
"It's definitely a big inspiration. He shows anything is possible, definitely," Heggebo said.
"The standards he's been delivering for over so many years, it's crazy. He's probably the most extreme level of celebrity or sporting person we've had in Norway ever.
"The whole team as a unit as well is performing at such a high level - you have the superstars, but I think that's the most impressive thing: how they're doing it as well."
Heggebo's time with Heggem at The Hawthorns was cut short by the centre-back's £10m move to Italy a month into last season.
Nevertheless, Heggebo said watching his former Albion colleague's progress has been a joy.
"He's been outstanding, and his journey from Norway into Sweden and then England and Italy and playing in the World Cup now - it's an amazing story," he said.
"His professionalism and his football knowledge are so good, and his desire to become better as well. The ceiling for him is high."
As England's defence plots to contain Haaland on Saturday, Heggem will be doing likewise, trying to deny England's own inspirational leader Harry Kane.
And Heggebo, who said it would be "a dream to play for this team", is backing Heggem to keep Kane quiet.
"I think he'll have him in control. What a game it will be. Can't wait."