Title: Injury-hit Ireland set for Nations Cup challenge
URL: https://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/articles/cwy299pl1vro



The Ireland men’s hockey team will be without several key players for the upcoming FIH Nations Cup in South Africa.
Mark Tumilty’s side went unbeaten in qualification for the World Cup in Chile in March, but seven of that squad will not travel to Cape Town.
Sean Murray, Jamie Carr, Johnny McKee, Luke Rowe, Mark McNellis, Luke Witherow and Jonny Lynch are all missing.
"I look forward to the Nations Cup as it is our sole preparation for the World Cup,” explained Tumilty.
"We have made numerous squad changes from Chile due to injury and player availability.
“It is beneficial to give other players exposure to games at this level. I expect it to be a highly competitive tournament which is essential as we prepare for our first World Cup match."
Since taking the head coaching job in 2019, Tumilty has rebuilt the squad following a number of retirements after the failure to qualify for the 2020 Olympics.
He has handed a number of players their first international caps and while doing that succeeded in qualifying for the Paris 2024 Olympics, the Pro League for two seasons and now the World Cup this summer.
With the winners of the Nations Cup gaining promotion to the Pro League next season, the depth of his squad will be tested.
James Milliken, Ben Ryder, Nick Page, Daragh Walsh, Evan Jennings, Ben Walker and Ben Johnson are the players given the opportunity, with Jennings expected to make his senior international debut.
There is still plenty of experience in the side which will be led by captain Kyle Marshall and includes Olympians Peter McKibbin, Lee Cole and Matthew Nelson.



Why is the Nations Cup so important?
The Nations Cup is the equivalent of the Championship in English football.
It is played every year with countries that would be roughly within the range of 10-20 in the world rankings.
There are eight teams involved, which include one that will have gained promotion from Nations League 2 and one that has been relegated from the Pro League, or the 'Premier League of World Hockey'.
The winners of the Nations Cup will be promoted to the Pro League next season.

Why is this important?
Every country wants to play in the top-flight competition against the best in the world.
For a country like Ireland, this is a tough proposition but it's also the only way to improve.
The guaranteed fixtures in a season leading up to the LA Olympic qualifiers for 2028 should also benefit any country with the Games as a longer term goal.
Ireland played in the Pro League in the 2023-24 season and qualified for the Paris Olympics.
After playing for two seasons in the Pro League before being relegated, Ireland also qualified for the top flight of the EuroHockey championships and made the World Cup finals after missing out in 2022.



Squad and fixtures

Ireland have been drawn in Pool B of the competition alongside hosts South Africa, recent rivals France, and tournament debutants USA.
They enter the competition as the top-ranked side. Ireland open their campaign against the USA on 11 June, face France two days later before a final pool stage match against South Africa on 16 June.
A top-two finish will be enough to progress to the semi-finals on 19 June.
Ireland squad: Luke Roleston, James Milliken, Fergus Gibson, Ben Ryder, Lee Cole, Greg Williams, Kyle Marshall, Peter McKibbin, Sam Hyland, Nick Page, Peter Brown, Adam McAllister, Daragh Walsh, Evan Jennings, Ali Empey, Ben Nelson, Matty Nelson, Jeremy Duncan, Ben Johnson, Ben Walker
