Title: Why Europe's top clubs are eyeing Morocco's teenage sensation Bouaddi
URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/articles/c802jp3lz13o?at_medium=RSS&at_campaign=rss


Morocco stole hearts with their run to the semi-finals of the 2022 World Cup in Qatar and the north Africans are once again shining on the global stage, although there is one important difference this time - the addition of teenage sensation Ayyoub Bouaddi.
The 18-year-old was the talk of social media following his superb showing in Morocco's tournament opener against Brazil, overshadowing the established opposition midfield duo of Casemiro and Bruno Guimaraes.
Both those players featured in the Premier League last season and after becoming one of the stars of the opening weeks of the World Cup, Lille midfielder Bouaddi is attracting the attention of the biggest clubs in England and Europe.
"Anyone who has watched him at Lille knows his level," former Morocco international Hassan Kachloul tells BBC Sport. "He is regarded as a top prospect.
"Against players like Casemiro, Lucas Paqueta and Bruno Guimaraes, he showed not just quality but personality - a kind of positive arrogance. He had confidence, a great aura and a strong presence on the pitch. He thrives in that environment."
The 6ft 1in midfielder's eye-catching performances mean he is being monitored by the likes of Manchester City and Arsenal, as well as Real Madrid, Barcelona and Paris St-Germain.
City have already agreed a club-record deal to sign England international Elliot Anderson from Nottingham Forest for £116m, and could further bolster their midfield with the addition of Bouaddi.
Sources have told BBC Sport the youngster features on City's list of targets and Kachloul feels Lille may have to sell to the highest bidder "if the player wants to move".
Moroccan football journalist Amine el Amri tells BBC Sport: "It is natural that a player that is having such a good World Cup is being linked with big clubs.
"However, that makes it a delicate period in his development because he needs to keep his feet on the ground and not to be taken out of his context - he is 18 years old.
"Premier League clubs are now targeting younger players, it is not just about experience, it is how good you are in terms of footballing skill. It is also about physicality so I think he has got all those attributes."
So what are Bouaddi's qualities and what would he add to the City midfield?

'Potential to be one of the best midfielders ever'
The youngster, born just north of Paris in Senlis, made his debut for Lille aged 16 years and three days and has gone on to make a total of 96 appearances for the French club.
Bouaddi, who only made his Morocco debut in May, has featured three times at the World Cup so far, helping the side to the last-16 stage, where they will face Canada on Saturday (kick-off 18:00 BST).
On his tournament debut against five-time winners Brazil he caught the eye with his calmness on the ball - he managed more touches (87) and completed more accurate passes (60) than any other team-mate.
"He has the potential to be one of the best midfielders ever in the game, not just for Morocco," says El Amri. "He has such talent but he has to keep his cool and his feet on the ground. You can't be a star if you don't work hard enough.
"At first glance, he reminds you a lot of [former Spain and Barcelona midfielder] Sergio Busquets. He is very tall but also not very muscular. Normally you would get players with muscles in the number six or eight position.
"What he does best is keep his cool when he has the ball and when he is pressing. He doesn't commit a lot of fouls, which is what made Busquets a complete midfielder."
Bouaddi highlighted his prospects last season by leading the way in numerous metrics for players aged 18 or under across Europe's big five leagues.
He played the most minutes (2,329) and made the most appearances (30) - more than the likes of Barcelona superstar Lamine Yamal, Werder Bremen centre-back Karim Coulibaly and Wolves' Mateus Mane.
His energetic, all-action performances saw him top the rankings for players among his age category by winning possession 151 times, making a total of 59 tackles and 27 interceptions.
Lille have reportedly set an asking price of between £69m and £86m for Bouaddi, which is seemingly the going rate now for a top-class midfielder, something highlighted by City's impending club-record acquisition of England's Anderson.
Enzo Maresca's side were interested in signing Sandro Tonali too, but the Italy international has agreed to join Tottenham instead, while there are question marks over the long-term future of Rodri, who has entered the final year of his contract at City.
Bouaddi may be the solution going forward but the player's immediate aim will be to help his country go one better than their achievement four years ago, when they reached the last four of the World Cup before being beaten by France.
El Amri adds: "Everybody loves Bouaddi in Morocco. Not just because he is such a good player but off the field he is - as we say - the perfect son in law.
"He gained his high school diploma in mathematics and physics which shows the intelligence and IQ of this player.
"He has got what it takes to be not only be a fantastic player but a very good human being too and people in Morocco identify with that."
Tactical analysis: The ability to cover two positions

Football tactics correspondent
Bouaddi is a player mature beyond his young age.
With Maresca typically setting up his sides in a 3-2-2-3 shape on the ball, looking at what a player offers in this formation helps us make sense of transfer links.
Bouaddi is versatile, playing most of his minutes as a holding midfielder. His ability to remain composed under pressure before dribbling out of tight situations has helped Morocco dominate possession at this World Cup.
His game is centred on deceptive feints rather than raw pace and combined with his tall frame results in a certain elegance reminiscent of John Stones or the aforementioned Busquets.
He is aggressive in his pressing which can leave space behind him. Positional discipline may be something Maresca looks to refine in his game but Bouaddi's long legs help him win tackles impressively.
The Moroccan youngster has also played at right-back, an area City are looking to strengthen. Maresca has shown a preference for full-backs inverting into midfield in possession.
He would therefore provide good cover defending as a right-back before moving into a holding midfield position at Manchester City.
