Title: AI used to tackle rising tide of boat thefts
URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c3931nm310xo



Boat owners have been using artificial intelligence (AI) to catch thieves on the water after a spate of break-ins at a yacht club.

Parkstone Yacht Club, has teamed up with Poole Harbour Commissioners and Dorset Marine Police to launch a community app known as "Moor Mesh".

The free to use system links to cameras in Poole Harbour and alerts all boat owners and the Harbour Master instantly if there has been a suspected break-in.

Jon Knight, member of the club and technology designer behind Moor Mesh, said the idea came about after 17 boats were broken into last year.

He said thieves were not targeting luxury yachts but were instead ransacking the smaller sailing boats at the club, taking marine electronics and other expensive items from inside.

"These are old sailing boats that are probably 20-30 years old but that owners put a huge amount of love and care and attention into," Knight said.

He added it in turn increases their insurance premiums and causes a "real problem" for the owners.

Knight said that they put their boats on a mooring buoy in the harbour because it is substantially cheaper than putting it in the more secure marinas but it means the vessels have become "prime targets".

Moor Mesh uses cameras to provide the exact coordinates and timing when a suspected crime is taking place and allows the Harbour Master and Dorset Police to collect evidence in real time as well as intercept suspects on the water or at landing locations.


Closed to boat crime
George McInnes, also from Parkstone Yacht Club, said: "We couldn't sit idly by and rely solely on the stretched resources of the local police team or the volunteers of Harbour Watch."

Plans are already in motion to share the technology with neighbouring clubs, including Poole Yacht Club, Lilliput Sailing Club, and Salterns Marina.

"The power of this project comes through the wider community," said McInnes.

He said it is a deterrent that sends a clear message that "Poole Harbour is a closed door for boat crime".

Parkstone Yacht Club has also implemented DNA marking and electronic tagging of property, which helps to make stolen items traceable to the police.

A police spokesperson said: "We know the significant impact that maritime-related crime can have on a business and we will continue to work with the marine community to take positive action to recover stolen property and identify suspected offenders."